By Pravin Bowry On 16th December, 2011, the Unclaimed Financial Assets Act, 2011 (Act 40 of 2011) came into force. Kenyans are yet to realise the personal and economic significance of the new law. It is estimated that unclaimed financial assets in the form of forgotten cash accounts, unpaid dividends, pensions, life assurances and investments, fixed deposits and certificates of deposit currently exceed Sh10 billion, with financial institutions mainly enjoying this undisclosed wealth.  The law relates to financial assets considered dormant, unclaimed and abandoned when contact with the owner or his heirs and personal representatives is lost over an extended period. Untimely death is the most common reason for the assets not being claimed. Long illnesses of the owner, name changes after marriage, divorce, unreported changes of address, incomplete or illegal records and fast pace of emigration, all contribute to the assets being forgotten. One individual using multiple names to hide his wealth from the tax authorities is yet another reason.  Agency to probe banks, insurance firms over unclaimed assets  Unclaimed assets agency to audit firms  ICPSK calls for scrutiny of unclaimed assets  Surrender or get penalised, holders of unclaimed assets ordered When rightful owners fail to claim these forgotten assets over a specified number of years known as ‘dormancy period’ these abandoned funds held by banks, stock-brokers, utilities, employers, life insurance companies and the Government normally transfer these assets into "suspense accounts" or trust accounts in a legal process known as ‘escheat’ In most cases of forgotten assets, thousands of owners or family members are or remain ignorant or unaware of their entitlement to collect or make a claim on behalf of a deceased relative. It is estimated that one third of insurance policies are not paid because family members were not aware of the policy or the insurance company was not notified and no effort is made to find the reason for dormancy of the financial asset.  Take a quick survey and help us improve our website! Time threshold The Act establishes the Unclaimed Financial Assets Authority and its objects and functions are to enforce and generally to administer the provisions of the law and act as trustee to the Unclaimed Assets Trust Fund, created for the control of unclaimed assets.  The list of unclaimed assets now is fairly well defined. Travellers cheques and money orders unclaimed for two years after issuance are presumed abandoned as are cheques, drafts or similar instruments on which a bank or financial institute is directly liable. The same time limit is applicable to life or endowment policies. The time threshold is increased to five years in the case of savings or mentioned time deposits with banking institutes and also any funds paid towards the purchase of shares, mutual investment certificates or any other interest in a bank or financial institute. Advance deposits made by subscribers with utility companies such as Kenya Power and Lighting Company unclaimed by the owner for more than two years after termination of the services for which the deposit or advance payment was made is also covered. Stocks, shares and other intangible ownership interests in a business entity, the existence of which is evidenced by available records, is presumed abandoned if no dividend is claimed for three years or no communication from the beneficiary is received and the business entity does not know the whereabouts of the owner. The law is applicable to those holding assets in fiduciary capacity, gift certificates, unpaid wages and assets held in safe deposit boxes. The law imposes a duty on the holder of the assets to make all "reasonable efforts" to locate and trace the owner and to notify the owner about those assets with financial institutes being required to make reports to the Authority and thereafter, if not claimed, these assets have to be delivered to or vested in the Authority. Upon payment or delivery of assets to the Authority in good faith the Authority assumes custody and responsibility for the safe keeping of the assets and exonerates and discharges the holder of the unclaimed assets from all claims and liabilities. Throw away savings The Authority must maintain a database of all unclaimed assets with all requisite particulars. Machinery for an individual to claim from the Authority has been put in place. Kenyans must learn to appreciate that their hard earned lifelong assets should be well documented and preserved by being more businesslike. Learning not to throw away savings and assets must become a priority for every Kenyan. Prior to enactment of the law, financial institutes made colossal profits from thousands of depositors, a lacuna which the new law seeks to address.  The law has its challenges in that it is not synchronised with the Succession Act, the Banking Act, the Companies Act and the Public Trustee Act and many Kenyan habits of hiding assets have not been provided for.  The writer is a lawyer. bowryp@hotmail.com   Britam Holdings records a loss of 1.19 billion shillings in its 2015 results  Britam Holdings records a loss of 1.19 billion shillings in its 2015 results By Paul Ogemba | 2 hours ago By Wambua Sammy | 3 hours ago By Winfrey Owino | 5 hours ago By Moses Nyamori | 5 hours ago Read The Standard uninterrupted with no advertisements