By Pravin Bowry The wind of change in the Judiciary is beginning to bear fruit for the ordinary Kenyan, and some hitherto unimaginable decisions are filtering through, thereby asserting respect for law and order, the Bill of Rights and the rule of law. A few days ago, Honourable Justice D.S. Majanja of the Constitutional and Human Rights Division sitting in Nairobi in the case of Samura Engineering Limited and 10 Others vs Kenya Revenue Authority (Petition No.54 of 2011) passed a judgement from which many a lesson can be learnt.  In the words of the Judge in the judgement the facts of the case were thus: "1. The 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th, 7th, and 8th Petitioners are limited liability companies incorporated in Kenya. The 9th, 10th, and 11th Petitioners are the companies’ directors. They all bring this petition against the Kenya Revenue Authority, a statutory corporation established under the Kenya Revenue Authority Act (Cap 469 of the Laws of Kenya), which is the central body for assessment and collection of revenue, for the administration and enforcement of law relating to revenue and for connected purposes.   KRA loses Sh1 billion tax claim against Dubai firm  KRA in another battle with Google, now over taxation  Keroche to pay extra Sh1b to KRA through new product   Ukrainians up tourist visits 2. This case concerns the exercise of the statutory powers of search and seizure exercised by officers of the KRA in execution its statutory mandate and whether exercise thereof violated the Petitioners’ rights and fundamental freedoms.  3. The 1st Petitioner was contracted by the Respondent to install security equipment on its premises. After completion of the contract works, the Respondent refused to pay arguing that the work was not done in accordance with the terms and conditions of the contract. 4. A dispute was declared and referred to a single arbitrator, Engineer P. T. Gichuhi, for determination. On 12th February 2011, the arbitrator notified the parties that the award was ready and would be delivered on payment of his professional fees.  Take a quick survey and help us improve our website! The Bounty Hotel 5. On 2nd February 2011, ten days before the notification of the award by the arbitrator, the Respondent, through its officers and in the company of police men raided the Petitioners’ offices at the Bounty Hotel in Industrial Area and carried away the Petitioners’ vital documents, equipment and personal items without prior notice.  6. Before the carrying out the search and seizure, the Respondent’s officers ordered the Petitioners employees to stand and move away from their working desks. The officers demanded and were given PIN numbers of all the computers seized. An inventory was prepared for some of the documents seized but others were not listed as the officers were in such a hurry that they forgot to open the big boxes which they carried away.  7. According to the 11th Petitioner, who is the 9th Petitioner’s wife, the Respondent’s team was very menacing. She avers that she was singled out for humiliation and harassment for reasons unknown to her" The court first generally considered the breach of the Petitioners’ Fundamental Rights and Freedoms, Freedom and Security of the Person under Article 29 of the Constitution and Infringement of Right to Privacy. The Income Tax of the Value Added Tax was also considered. The Judge held that under the provisions of the Income Tax Act the power to search and seize must be on the basis of a warrant issued by the court which must be satisfied that an offence has been committed and that the Act does not permit carrying away of books but only of extracts of those books and documents. The Judge rubbished the startling contention of an officer of the KRA who had stated "Further, from my experience as a tax investigator, I am aware that the evaders go to great lengths to conceal documents and information and may aid in tax investigations hence the need to seize everything found" The Judge held that the seizure of the Petitioners’ properties was unconstitutional and proceeded to award damages of Sh2,600,000 and also awarded the costs. He held that the court "has wide jurisdiction in award of relief and discretion in the manner it conducts its proceedings and that mere declaration of unconstitutionality could not suffice" Some pertinent observations will highlight the changes. It is gratifying to note that within about 13 months after the incident the High Court had finalised a High Court Petition and given an award. I can only say well done, more so with the knowledge that I have Petitions which have been ongoing for up to 6 years, one in which judgement has been deferred for over three years!  Meaningful redress Secondly, even powerful law enforcing agencies must strictly work within the ambit of law or face the consequences. Thirdly, that as the Judge noted, awards can only be made if the Petitioners present and prosecute their petitions by giving the court all facts to award meaningful redress. And of course at the end of it all, it is you and I, the obedient tax payers, who have and will pay for the ills of KRA. Pity that the Judge did not order an inquiry into the conduct of each officer responsible, or order the officer’s reprimand or even sacking or surcharging the officers. For any ordinary citizen the Constitution is no longer a toothless bull dog!  The writer is a lawyer. bowryp@hotmail.com   War on Counterfeits: KRA officers sieze more than 30,000 litres of opaque beer in Embu county  KRA yakusanya shilingi 200B katika mwaka wa 2020; ni kiasi kikubwa kinyume na matarajio  KRA officials seize top of the range vehicles valued at 28 million for tax evasion in Mombasa By Paul Ogemba | 2 hours ago By Wambua Sammy | 3 hours ago By Winfrey Owino | 5 hours ago By Moses Nyamori | 5 hours ago Read The Standard uninterrupted with no advertisements