By Pravin Bowry Cases of death and injuries on our roads are a daily occurrence and even major accidents do not these days prick the conscious of an average Kenyan to actively search for solutions. Away from the matatus, lorries, trucks and buses on our roads the plight of the cyclists has largely gone unaddressed and ignored and enhancing of safety of cyclists is unheard of in Kenya.  Bicycles versus vehicles make up about four per cent of traffic accidents in Kenya. Can these accidents be prevented? Riding on urban or rural roads is a dangerous matter and at night the risks are even greater. Most cyclists do not have front and rear lights or reflectors or reflective clothing posing a danger for themselves and other road users.  Narok Roads CEC dies of Covid-19  Mystery of KeRRA's official's similar case filed in different courts  Nigerian air force passenger plane crash kills seven people  Nairobi slums to have walkways, cycle lanes, says Kura The fundamental barrier which prevents the overwhelming majority of cyclists desirous to use bicycles or coming to work on bicycles is fear of motorised traffic. With Nairobi becoming a city of highways and motorways it is sad to note that cyclists have not been catered for with no cycling lanes being constructed even in the new estates. Realising that most cyclists are from the lower income bracket, can the legal machinery be put to protect cyclists. Should each and every cyclist not have a helmet, lights and reflectors on his bicycle and have a reflective band or vests as a matter of law?  Take a quick survey and help us improve our website! In every urban centre all over the world, cyclists are being catered for with cycle infrastructure in the form of cycling lanes, parking bays, locker rooms etc and even insurance facilities. The Dutch have a world-class cycle infrastructure providing for cyclists a safe travelling mode leading to 25 per cent of all journeys being made by bicycle across Netherlands. finance guru Can we not have another ‘Michuki’ and tame the cyclists? But more than taming and educating the cyclist — can those in the non-legal arena be made aware of the problem who then can be made to be proactive? One of the answer lies with the Minister of Finance and it would help if the finance guru thinks of saving lives of hundreds of Kenyans, now, in the middle of February, four months before the June Budget date. The simple prayer to the Finance Minister is to exempt from all duties cycling equipment such as helmets, dynamos, lights, reflectors and reflective bands and jackets and making it mandatory for cyclists to wear and use these tax free live saving equipment. A culture of a working class Kenyan to cycle must be created and there is a case for making cycling cheaper. The Attorney–General can and should amend the Traffic Act. Cyclists should be trained in Highway Code and a culture of cyclist safety developed even in Schools. A cycle friendly country would be very helpful. Basic training in how to get on the roads and obey the Highway Code should be standard for all school children. In England highly placed judges and professors and university students all routinely cycle to work — cycling to work contributes to the daily quota of exercise without having to set aside extra time or pay gym fees. NGOs engaged in road safety should seek to get corporate sponsors to promote safety of cyclists on our roads and campaign for the rights of the cyclists. Then there is the issue of law enforcement. How can the already overworked traffic police enforce the law all over the country? Instant pre-set fining by the offenders with fines payable at any bank or by M-Pesa or police stations will go a long way to helping save lives. Police do not enforce the law, in particular the law relating to riding at night without lights this should be done more actively. amend Traffic Act There is yet another related matter of pedestrians on our trunk roads. With the new motorways pedestrians are endangering their own lives and those of others and there is now a need to amend the Traffic Act completely to cater for new developments in our roads to bar pedestrians from jumping or crossing on highways. The solution it would appear is for the Attorney-General to draft a set of new laws in consultation with Ministry of Finance and the Judiciary to prompt a cycling culture, cheap, healthy, environmentally friendly mode to combat the traffic jams. Spare a thought, therefore, for the cyclists of Kenya and let laws be adopted for a cycling friendly nation.  The writer is a lawyer. bowryp@hotmail.com    Wachuuzi wahatarisha maisha yao kuendeleza biashara zao ya uchuuzi barabarani  Abiria wanne wafariki katika ajali ya barabarani katika eneo la Murang'a  Interview with Transport PS Irungu Nyakera on the increasing number of deaths from road accidents By Paul Ogemba | 2 hours ago By Wambua Sammy | 3 hours ago By Winfrey Owino | 5 hours ago By Moses Nyamori | 5 hours ago Read The Standard uninterrupted with no advertisements