By Pravin Bowry The new Constitution has been in force for a little over one year and five months, and the Parliament has also enacted over sixty pieces of legislation since promulgation. Some laws have even not been published by the Government Printer (for example, the Limited Partnerships Act, Act No. 42 of 2011 which is unavailable at the Government Printer because it is too "voluminous" to be printed!) The transitional and consequential provisions should by now have been streamlined but they have not. Procedural and implementational machinery of the law are sandwiched between the old laws and the new laws and aggravated by some abysmal drafting of the new statutes.  Reading the daily newspapers gives a picture that every single case, all actions of the Executive, all matters related to State Corporations, parastatals, private and public companies and even the Judiciary, and the ongoing appointments are likely to be delayed for years due to confusion in law and self-interested defeatist legalities. Let us examine the Constitution. Despite the lapse of time, the Chief Justice has not published the Rules under Article 22(3) to enforce the Bills of Rights and all constitutional applications under the new Constitution and the Judiciary are working under the old "Gicheru Rules" of 2006. Similarly, the Supreme Court of Kenya has not yet published the rules under which it is supposed to function. Procedure for moving to the newly created Supreme Court is not in place and the process for filing of Appeals in the Court of Appeal has not been laid.   Parliament to hold special sitting to debate BBI Bill  Constitutional change: The process is as old as Kenya  National Assembly to have special sitting to debate BBI  BBI changes will cost Sh20b more annually An example of bad drafting arises in the Constitution. The Constitution provides for different procedures for sacking of the Chief Justice and the Judges but no mention is made for the Deputy Chief Justice. Is the Deputy Chief Justice a "Chief Justice" or a Judge? This lacuna is likely to open Pandora’s box in the ongoing cases relating to the Deputy Chief Justice. Transfer of magistrates Have things really changed in the Judiciary on the ground? Looking at last week’s en masse transfer of magistrates — albeit after a lot of thought and consultation and participation of the Judicial Service Commission — no real change is visible. The short notice of transfers will leave a track of thousands of "part heard cases", both criminal and civil.  Take a quick survey and help us improve our website! The magistrates should have been moved only after completion of all the cases commenced by the magistrates. The costly exercise of starting the cases de novo and the financial burden of bringing back a magistrate to the old station contributes to delay and is costly not only to the taxpayer but also the affected litigants. Then the proliferation of new-found causes of action based on the new Constitution and new laws but procedurally clothed in old system is creating havoc due to the ongoing "injunction syndrome" and hybrid varieties of applications under the guise of judicial review jurisdiction. The Civil Procedure Rules and the Court of Appeal Rules which came in force in December 2010 remain to be applied rigidly by the Judiciary, some of the Judges openly saying they are unable to implement to new rules due of logistic reasons and their impracticality, whilst other judges use the non-compliance of the rules to old pre-2010 matters as reason for adjourning cases. There is yet another emerging problem in criminal matters. The Attorney-General is no longer vested with prosecutorial powers. Procedurally all application against the Government must be filed by enjoining the Attorney-General.  When will laws be enacted to formally empower the Director of Public Prosecutions to exclusively deal with all criminal applications of whatsoever nature? If constitutional changes are to have a real meaning, the roles of the Ombudsman, Ethics and Anti-Corruption Commission, the Witness Protection Agency, the Minister of Justice and Constitutional Affairs, the Attorney –General and the Solicitor – General need to be better integrated and synchronised in the justice system. Worrying decision The other concern is Cabinet’s decision to stop most of the land transactions. This worrying decision has caused great concern amongst the lawyers. The System of Courts under Article 162 was to set up "Courts with the status of the High Court to hear and determine disputes relating to the environment, and the use and occupation of and title to land".  In light of the Cabinet decision, when will the Environment and Land Court be functional as an entity? Realising that the rules of procedure in the administration of justice are handmaidens of justice, the earlier the procedural matters are addressed and put in place the better for all concerned. It will be a challenge for the Chief Justice to procedurally rein in the flow of constitutional and judicial review applications which presently are slowing the cause of justice.  The writer is a lawyer. bowryp@hotmail.com   Push to amend constitution hots up as 15 more counties debate the BBI bill today | Political Point  Moise Katumbi nominated as presidential candidate for the November poll in DRC  Patrick Amimo with an Update on the Gender Bill vote due in parliament By Paul Ogemba | 2 hours ago By Wambua Sammy | 3 hours ago By Winfrey Owino | 5 hours ago By Moses Nyamori | 5 hours ago Read The Standard uninterrupted with no advertisements